Revamped React Native Getting Started Guide (#3866)
aws-amplify/docs: src/fragments/start/getting-started/reactnative/integrate.mdx

In this section you’ll integrate Amplify DataStore with your app, and learn to use the generated data model to create, update, query, and delete Todo items by building an app. You can find the source code of the final Todo App [on our GitHub repository](https://github.com/chintannp/amplified_todo_rn).

## Boilerplate UI
First, we will create some files and place the boilerplate UI code in it. You might find your IDE complains about unreferenced declarations but, don’t worry, we’ll get around to fixing those as we fill out our app with more functionality.

#### App.js

> First, replace the contents of your **App.js** file with the following UI boilerplate code. Here, we are importing our Home component. Additionally, we are configuring Amplify using `Amplify.configure`. You might have already done this in previous step while setting up the project.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
First, replace the contents of your `App.js` file with the following UI boilerplate code. Here, we are importing our Home component. Additionally, we are configuring Amplify using `Amplify.configure`. You might have already done this in previous step while setting up the project.
```

```js
import React from 'react';
import { StatusBar, StyleSheet, View } from 'react-native';
import Amplify from 'aws-amplify';
import Home from './src/Home';

import awsconfig from './src/aws-exports';

Amplify.configure(awsconfig);

export default function App() {
  return (
    <View style={styles.container}>
      <StatusBar />
      <Home />
    </View>
  );
}

const styles = StyleSheet.create({
  container: {
    backgroundColor: '#fff',
    flex: 1,
  },
});
```

#### Home.js

> Next, we will create a Home component for our app which will implement most of the CRUD functionality for our app. Create a new file **Home.js** at location *src/Home.js*. Here, we have total four components defined :

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Next, we will create a Home component for our app which will implement most of the CRUD functionality for our app. Create a new file `Home.js` at location `src/Home.js`. Here, we have total four components defined :
```

Update the `setComplete` function in the `TodoList` component.

```js
  async function setComplete(updateValue, todo) {
    //update the todo item with updateValue
    await DataStore.save(
      Todo.copyOf(todo, updated => {
        updated.isComplete = updateValue
      })
    );
  }
```

That’s it! Restart your app and you should now be able to toggle a todo between completed and not completed states. We’re almost done here but what if you want to delete an item from your todo list? We’ll go over how to do that next.

### Deleting a Todo

Deleting an existing data entry is even easier than updating one since you don’t need to copy the instance to delete it. It may not be the best user experience to do this but, for this app, we will trigger deletion of a todo item to a long press of the item.

Update the `deleteTodo()` function in the `TodoList` component.

```js
  async function deleteTodo(todo) {
    try {
      await DataStore.delete(todo);
    } catch (e) {
      console.log('Delete failed: $e');
    }
  }
```

> Reload your app once more and you should now be able to long press an item to delete it. Now we have a fully featured CRUD application that saves and retrieves data on the local device, which means this app **works without an AWS account or even an internet connection.** Next, we’ll connect it to AWS and make sure the data is available in the cloud.

Reviewer: At the end of this section - can we add the full file with all the functions added to it - so that developers can copy and use all of the functionality if they need to?

Author: Abdallah, I believe that would make the integrate section too long and make it seem harder to our users. We already have a link to sample Github repo at the start of the section. Maybe, we can add a link for the sample Home.js file from the same github repo. What do you think?

Reviewer: Yes! I like that a lot, @chintannp! Thank you for the suggestion!

Author: Cool. I have added the link to the complete `Home.js` file.

In this section you’ll integrate Amplify DataStore with your app, and learn to use the generated data model to create, update, query, and delete Todo items by building an app. You can find the source code of the final Todo App [on our GitHub repository](https://github.com/chintannp/amplified_todo_rn).

## Boilerplate UI

> First, we will create some files and place the boilerplate UI code in it. You might find your IDE complains about unreferenced declarations but, don’t worry, we’ll get around to fixing those as we fill out our app with more functionality.

Reviewer 2: > You might find your IDE complains about unreferenced declarations

Is this true with the React Native boilerplate as well?

Author: It doesn't complain. I have removed it. Thanks Chris.

Author: It is best practice for React Native CLI. I have updated the guide to use `index.js` for RN CLI. However, Expo does not have `index.js` file. So, `App.js` will be used for Expo.

#### App.js
First, replace the contents of your `App.js` file with the following UI boilerplate code. Here, we are importing our Home component. Additionally, we are configuring Amplify using `Amplify.configure`. You might have already done this in previous step while setting up the project.

```js
import React from 'react';
import { StatusBar, StyleSheet, View } from 'react-native';
import Amplify from 'aws-amplify';
import Home from './src/Home';

import awsconfig from './src/aws-exports';

> Amplify.configure(awsconfig);

Reviewer 2: Would it actually be best practice to configure this in `index.js` instead?

Author: It is best practice for React Native CLI. I have updated the guide to use index.js for RN CLI. However, Expo does not have index.js file. So, App.js will be used for Expo.

export default function App() {
  return (
    <View style={styles.container}>
      <StatusBar />
      <Home />
    </View>
  );
}

const styles = StyleSheet.create({
  container: {
    backgroundColor: '#fff',
    flex: 1,
  },
});
```

#### Home.js

> Next, we will create a Home component for our app which will implement most of the CRUD functionality for our app. Create a new file `Home.js` at location `src/Home.js`. Here, we have total four components defined :

Reviewer 2: Nit:
```suggestion
Next, we will create a Home component for our app which will implement most of the CRUD functionality for our app. Create a new file `Home.js` in the `src` folder. Here, we have total four components defined :
```

1. **Header**: Simple Header component with Title.

> 2. **AddModal**: Used for displaying a Modal when a new Todo needs to be added.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
2. **AddTodoModal**: Used for displaying a Modal when a new Todo needs to be added.
```

3. **TodoList**: Used for displaying the list of Todos.
4. **Home**: Default component that wraps all the above component and a Button for adding a new Todo item.

Copy the below boilerplate UI code into the newly create file.

```js
import React, { useState, useEffect } from 'react';
import {
  FlatList,
  Modal,
  Pressable,
  StyleSheet,
  Text,
  TextInput,
  View,
} from 'react-native';
import { DataStore } from 'aws-amplify';
import { Todo } from './models';

const Header = () => (
  <View style={styles.headerContainer}>
    <Text style={styles.headerTitle}>My Todo List</Text>
  </View>
);

const AddTodoModal = ({ modalVisible, setModalVisible }) => {
  const [name, setName] = useState('');
  const [description, setDescription] = useState('');

  async function addTodo() {

>   }

Reviewer 2: Nit: I would suggest leaving some comments in these empty functions indicating that they are intentionally empty for now as code will be added in a later step

Author: Added the comment "to be filled in a later step". Thanks Chris

  function closeModal() {
    setModalVisible(false);
  }

  return (
    <Modal
      animationType="fade"
      onRequestClose={closeModal}
      transparent
      visible={modalVisible}
    >
      <View style={styles.modalContainer}>
        <View style={styles.modalInnerContainer}>
          <Pressable onPress={closeModal} style={styles.modalDismissButton}>
            <Text style={styles.modalDismissText}>X</Text>
          </Pressable>
          <TextInput
            onChangeText={setName}
            placeholder="Name"
            style={styles.modalInput}
          />
          <TextInput
            onChangeText={setDescription}
            placeholder="Description"
            style={styles.modalInput}
          />
          <Pressable onPress={addTodo} style={styles.buttonContainer}>
            <Text style={styles.buttonText}>Save Todo</Text>
          </Pressable>
        </View>
      </View>
    </Modal>
  );
};

const TodoList = () => {
  const [todos, setTodos] = useState([]);

  useEffect(() => {

  }, []);

  async function deleteTodo(todo) {
  }

  async function setComplete(updateValue, todo) {

>   }

Reviewer 2: Ditto above

Author: Added the comment "to be filled in a later step". Thanks Chris

>   const TodoItem = ({ item }) => (

Reviewer 2: Nit: I think it is idiomatic to just call this a `renderItem` function or even to place it inline of the FlatList rather than treating this as a component being defined within another component. You can see in RN's docs this is how they have it in their sample snippets as well.
```suggestion
  const renderItem = ({ item }) => (
```

Author: Updated the name of the function to renderItem.

    <Pressable
      onLongPress={() => {
        deleteTodo(item);
      }}
      onPress={() => {
        setComplete(!item.isComplete, item);
      }}
      style={styles.todoContainer}
    >
      <Text>
        <Text style={styles.todoHeading}>{item.name}</Text>
        {`\n${item.description}`}
      </Text>
      <Text
        style={[styles.checkbox, item.isComplete && styles.completedCheckbox]}
      >
        {item.isComplete ? '✓' : ''}
      </Text>
    </Pressable>
  );

  return (
    <FlatList
      data={todos}
      keyExtractor={({ id }) => id}
      renderItem={TodoItem}
    />
  );
};

const Home = () => {
  const [modalVisible, setModalVisible] = useState(false);

  return (
    <>
      <Header />
      <TodoList />
      <Pressable
        onPress={() => {
          setModalVisible(true);
        }}
        style={[styles.buttonContainer, styles.floatingButton]}
      >
        <Text style={styles.buttonText}>+ Add Todo</Text>
      </Pressable>
      <AddTodoModal
        modalVisible={modalVisible}
        setModalVisible={setModalVisible}
      />
    </>
  );
};

const styles = StyleSheet.create({
  headerContainer: {
    backgroundColor: '#4696ec',

>     paddingTop: Platform.OS === 'ios' ? 44 : null,

Reviewer 2: Nit: Should this be `undefined` (or even 0) instead of null?

Author: Good catch. I think it will behave the same but it is better to use `0`.

    bottom: 44,
    elevation: 6,
    shadowOffset: {
      height: 4,
      width: 1,
    },
    shadowOpacity: 0.3,
    shadowRadius: 4,
  },
  modalContainer: {
    backgroundColor: 'rgba(0,0,0,0.5)',
    flex: 1,
    justifyContent: 'center',
    padding: 16,
  },
  modalInnerContainer: {
    backgroundColor: '#fff',
    borderRadius: 16,
    justifyContent: 'center',
    padding: 16,
  },
  modalInput: {
    borderBottomWidth: 1,
    marginBottom: 16,
    padding: 8,
  },
  modalDismissButton: {
    marginLeft: 'auto',
  },
  modalDismissText: {
    fontSize: 20,
    fontWeight: '700',
  },
});

export default Home;
```

Go ahead and run your code now and you should see an app with empty todolist and a floating action button but not much else.

<BlockSwitcher>
<Block name="Expo">

```bash
expo start
```

</Block>
<Block name="React Native CLI">

To run on iOS, execute the following command:
```bash
npx react-native run-ios
```

To run on Android, execute the following command:
```bash
npx react-native run-android
```

</Block>
</BlockSwitcher>

Let’s next manipulate the data and add more functionality to our app.

## Manipulating data

### Creating a Todo

> The *Add todo* button opens up a Modal to add todos. But, right now, the form does nothing when the *Save* button is pressed. Let’s fix that by having it save a **Todo** to DataStore.

Reviewer 2: Nit: Your button text is Add Todo, I believe. It doesn't much matter which one we go with but it should be in alignment

Author: Yes. It definitely should be uniform everywhere. I have updated it. Thanks Chris.

Update the `addTodo()` function in the **AddTodoModal** component.

```js
  async function addTodo() {
    await DataStore.save(new Todo({ name, description, isComplete: false }));
    setModalVisible(false);
    setName('');
    setDescription('');
  }
```

If you try to add todos using the form now, it should successfully close the form when pressing the *Save* button. But our Todo list is still empty even if you restart the app! After initializing our todos as an empty list, we aren't currently updating it again. We will remedy that in the next step.

> ### Querying for Todos

Reviewer 2: I think this section and the next should be combined and updated to use the new `observeQuery` API. See Flutter: https://docs.amplify.aws/start/getting-started/integrate/q/integration/flutter/#querying-for-todos-and-observing-updates-in-real-time

Author: I have update the tutorial to use `observerQuery` instead of `observe`. The code is much simpler now.

    //msg variable is the updated todo item and can be used for further customizations.
    const subscription = DataStore.observe(Todo).subscribe((msg) => {
      //onQuery will be called each time a data update subscription is received.
      //onQuery will update the todos list with the latest data/
      onQuery();
    });

    //unsubscribe to data updates so that we don’t introduce a memory leak.
    return function cleanup() {
      subscription.unsubscribe();
    }
  }, []);
```

If you restart your app now, you should see that newly added todos will also start showing up on the list. The items look like they can be check off and marked as completed, but when pressed, they don’t seem to do anything right now. Let’s learn how to update existing data.

### Updating a Todo

Updating an existing data entry looks a lot like creating a new one. It’s important to note, however, that models in DataStore are *immutable*. So, to update a record you must use a model’s `copyOf` function rather than manipulating its properties directly.

Update the `setComplete` function in the `TodoList` component.

```js
  async function setComplete(updateValue, todo) {

>     //update the todo item with updateValue

Reviewer 2: Nit: Please audit comments to make sure they are consistent i.e.
* Either all or none have whitespace after the //
* Either all or none have the first letter capitalized

Author: I have update the comments to make sure they are consistent.

    await DataStore.save(
      Todo.copyOf(todo, updated => {
        updated.isComplete = updateValue
      })
    );
  }
```

> That’s it! Restart your app and you should now be able to toggle a todo between completed and not completed states. We’re almost done here but what if you want to delete an item from your todo list? We’ll go over how to do that next.

Reviewer 2: Nit: adjective
```suggestion
That’s it! Restart your app and you should now be able to toggle a todo between completed and not-completed states. We’re almost done here but what if you want to delete an item from your todo list? We’ll go over how to do that next.
```

### Deleting a Todo

> Deleting an existing data entry is even easier than updating one since you don’t need to copy the instance to delete it. It may not be the best user experience to do this but, for this app, we will trigger deletion of a todo item to a long press of the item.

Reviewer 2: Nit:
```suggestion
Deleting an existing data entry is even easier than updating one since you don’t need to copy the instance to delete it. It may not be the best user experience to do this but, for this app, we will trigger deletion of a todo item off of a long press of the item.
```

});
```

</Block>
<Block name="React Native CLI">

> ```js

Reviewer 2: React code should probably use jsx syntax highlighting. Is it supported?

Author: yes it is supported. I have updated it to use jsx for React syntax highlighting.

We will use the `useEffect()` hook of **TodoList** component to list the todo items. `useEffect()` can be used to perform side effects in function components. Add the below `useEffect()` in the **TodoList** component right after state initialization. You can find more about useEffect hook [here](https://reactjs.org/docs/hooks-effect.html).

```js
  useEffect(() => {

    //query the initial todolist and subscribe to data updates
    const subscription = DataStore.observeQuery(Todo).subscribe((snapshot) => {
      //isSynced can be used to show a loading spinner when the list is being loaded. 
      const { items, isSynced } = snapshot;
      setTodos(items);
    });

    //unsubscribe to data updates when component is destroyed so that we don’t introduce a memory leak.
    return function cleanup() {
      subscription.unsubscribe();
    }

  }, []);
```

> If you restart your app now, you should see that newly added todos will be automatically start showing up on the list. The items look like they can be check off and marked as completed, but when pressed, they don’t seem to do anything right now. Let’s learn how to update existing data.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
If you restart your app now, you should see that newly added todos will start showing up on the list. The items look like they can be check off and marked as completed, but when pressed, they don’t seem to do anything right now. Let’s learn how to update existing data.
```
